Curriculum
==========

The curriculum is the ordered sequence of episodes the agent trains on.
MariHA derives this sequence from the real gameplay recordings of human
subjects — giving the benchmark its human-alignment property.

Data model
----------

``EpisodeSpec``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each human gameplay clip is represented as an
:class:`~mariha.curriculum.episode.EpisodeSpec` dataclass:

.. code-block:: python

   @dataclass
   class EpisodeSpec:
       state_file: Path   # path to .state emulator snapshot
       max_steps:  int    # frame budget = frame_stop - frame_start
       scene_id:   str    # e.g. 'w1l1s0'
       clip_code:  str    # 14-char ordinal sort key
       subject:    str    # 'sub-01' … 'sub-06'
       session:    str    # 'ses-001' …
       outcome:    str    # 'completed' or 'failed'
       phase:      str    # 'discovery' or 'repetition'
       level:      str    # 'w1l1'
       metadata:   dict   # score, coins, enemies_killed, …

The ``state_file`` is an emulator save-state that places
Mario at exactly the position and game state the human was at when their
clip started.  This is what makes the training episodes *human-aligned* —
the agent faces the exact same visual and gameplay context the human did.

The ``clip_code`` is a 14-character string derived from the replay
filename that encodes a chronological sort order.  Sorting by
``clip_code`` reproduces the order in which the human encountered scenes
during their sessions.

``HumanSequence``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:class:`~mariha.curriculum.sequences.HumanSequence` loads all clips for a
given subject and returns them as an ordered iterator of
``EpisodeSpec`` objects:

.. code-block:: python

   from mariha.curriculum.sequences import HumanSequence

   sequence = HumanSequence(subject_id="sub-01")
   print(f"{len(sequence)} episodes across {sequence.num_tasks} scenes")

   for spec in sequence:
       print(spec.scene_id, spec.outcome, spec.max_steps)

The sequence is consumed once — like a Python iterator.  The
:class:`~mariha.env.continual.ContinualLearningEnv` wraps the sequence
and advances it episode by episode through ``reset()`` calls.

Scene IDs
---------

Scenes are identified by the string ``wXlYsZ`` where:

* ``X`` — world (1–8)
* ``Y`` — level within world (1–4)
* ``Z`` — scene index within level (0–N)

For example, ``w1l1s0`` is the first scene of world 1-1, ``w3l2s4`` is
the fifth scene of world 3-2.

A full list of all 313 scenes is generated by
:func:`~mariha.env.scenario_gen.generate_scenarios` from
``data/mario.scenes/sourcedata/scenes_info/scenes_mastersheet.csv``.
The canonical alphabetically-sorted ordering of scene IDs defines the
**task index** (0–312) used in the one-hot encoding.

Task switches
-------------

The :class:`~mariha.env.continual.ContinualLearningEnv` detects task
switches by comparing the ``scene_id`` of consecutive ``EpisodeSpec``
objects.  When the scene changes, the next ``reset()`` sets
``info["task_switch"] = True``.  The SAC training loop uses this to
trigger :meth:`~mariha.rl.sac.SAC.on_task_end` and
:meth:`~mariha.rl.sac.SAC._handle_task_change`.

Multiple clips per scene
------------------------

A human subject may attempt the same scene many times across different
sessions (e.g., if they failed it repeatedly before succeeding).  Each
attempt becomes a separate ``EpisodeSpec`` with its own ``state_file``
and ``max_steps``.  The agent trains on *all* of them in order, which
means it sees the same scene from multiple starting positions and with
varying frame budgets — a richer distribution than a single fixed reset.
